Data Structures – Definition,Linear Data Structures,Non-Linear Data Structures,Python Specific Data
Structures, List,Tuples, Set, Dictionaries, Comprehensions and its Types,Strings,slicing.

**Data Structure:** 
- Organizing, managing and storing data is important as it enables easier access and efficient modifications.
- Data Structures allows you to organize your data in such a way that enables you to store collections of data, relate them and perform operations on them accordingly.

**A data structure is classified into two categories:**
- Linear data structure
- Non-linear data structure

Now let's have a brief look at both these data structures.**

**What is the Linear data structure?**
A linear data structure is a structure in which the elements are stored sequentially, and the elements are connected to the previous and the next element. As the elements are stored sequentially, so they can be traversed or accessed in a single run. The implementation of linear data structures is easier as the elements are sequentially organized in memory. The data elements in an array are traversed one after another and can access only one element at a time.

The types of linear data structures are Array, Queue, Stack, Linked List.

Let's discuss each linear data structure in detail.

- **Array**: An array consists of data elements of a same data type. For example, if we want to store the roll numbers of 10 students, so instead of creating 10 integer type variables, we will create an array having size 10. Therefore, we can say that an array saves a lot of memory and reduces the length of the code.

- **Stack**: It is linear data structure that uses the LIFO (Last In-First Out) rule in which the data added last will be removed first. The addition of data element in a stack is known as a push operation, and the deletion of data element form the list is known as pop operation.

- **Queue**: It is a data structure that uses the FIFO rule (First In-First Out). In this rule, the element which is added first will be removed first. There are two terms used in the queue front end and rear The insertion operation performed at the back end is known ad enqueue, and the deletion operation performed at the front end is known as dequeue.

- **Linked list**: It is a collection of nodes that are made up of two parts, i.e., data element and reference to the next node in the sequence. 




**What is a Non-linear data structure?**
A non-linear data structure is also another type of data structure in which the data elements are not arranged in a contiguous manner. As the arrangement is nonsequential, so the data elements cannot be traversed or accessed in a single run. In the case of linear data structure, element is connected to two elements (previous and the next element), whereas, in the non-linear data structure, an element can be connected to more than two elements.

Trees and Graphs are the types of non-linear data structure. Let's discuss both the data structures in detail.

- **Tree**: It is a non-linear data structure that consists of various linked nodes. It has a hierarchical tree structure that forms a parent-child relationship. The diagrammatic representation of a tree data structure is shown below: For example, the posts of employees are arranged in a tree data structure like managers, officers, clerk. In the above figure, A represents a manager, B and C represent the officers, and other nodes represent the clerks.

- **Graph**: A graph is a non-linear data structure that has a finite number of vertices and edges, and these edges are used to connect the vertices. The vertices are used to store the data elements, while the edges represent the relationship between the vertices. A graph is used in various real-world problems like telephone networks, circuit networks, social networks like LinkedIn, Facebook. In the case of facebook, a single user can be considered as a node, and the connection of a user with others is known as edges. 


Python Specific Data Structures:

**List**:
- It is a general purpose most widely used in data structures
- List is a collection which is ordered and changeable and allows duplicate members. (Grow and shrink as needed, sequence type, sortable).
- To use a list, you must declare it first. Do this using square brackets and separate values with commas.
- We can construct / create list in many ways.

Ex:
```py
list1=[1,2,3,'A','B',7,8,[10,11]]
print(list1)
[1, 2, 3, 'A', 'B', 7, 8, [10, 11]]
----------------------
x=list()
x
[]
--------------------------
tuple1=(1,2,3,4)
x=list(tuple1)
x
```

```txt
[1, 2, 3, 4]
```

The list data type has some more methods. Here are all of the methods of list objects:
**List Operations**:
- Del()
- Append()
- Extend()
- Insert()
- Pop()
- Remove()
- Reverse()
- Sort()

**Delete**: Delete a list or an item from a list

```py
x=[5,3,8,6]
del(x[1]) #deletes the index position 1 in a list
x
```

```txt
[5, 8, 6]
```